hi I'm your mini van Dyken MD I'm a
surgeon by trade but my true passion is
helping people just like you obtain and
maintain optimum health we've made
videos on this channel before about why
wearing a mask can be beneficial in
preventing the spread of Cobra 19 and we
even posted a video on how to make your
own high quality filter mask this mask
that we came up with is modeled after an
n95 and it has very similar components
the links for these videos are in the
description below but what we've not
really talked about yet though is how to
clean and disinfect these masks ideally
an n95 or similar respirator mask is
designed to be worn only once it should
then be discarded that's a no-brainer
and that's what we did as health
professionals precoded now there's a
global shortage of masks with such a
shortage hospitals around the world are
looking for ways to be able to reuse
these masks they're forced to find ways
to decontaminate the masks and reuse
them we just can't throw these masks
away after one use like we used to so
how can we decontaminate these masks and
still keep them safe and working
properly 3m one of the main US
manufacturers of n95 has published a
white paper in which they list four
criteria that must be met in order for
their masks to be reused one to
inactivate SARS kohli to the virus that
causes Kovan 19 number to not damage the
respirators filtration number three not
affect the respirator fit number four be
safe for the person wearing the
respirator in other words it can't have
any harmful off-gassing as a result of
the treatment 3m is very clear and that
they do not recommend reuse or
decontamination of their masks stating
that no method achieves all these goals
that being said though we're in a
pandemic and we have to make do so
what's the best method of
decontaminating our and 95 what if it's
our one and only in 95 we have to reuse
over and over and over again well let's
back up and take a few moments to talk
about
direction of the mask itself an n95 is
made up of multiple layers of
polypropylene nonwoven fabrics when we
were creating our filter masks we
actually dissected the n95 so we could
see all the different layers among these
layers the most critical one is the
middle layer which is produced by a melt
blown process this layer is anywhere
from 100 to 1000 microns in thickness
and it's comprised of polypropylene
microfibers with a diameter in the range
of 1 to 10 microns you can see it in
this electron microscope picture here of
the melt blown layer as you see all
these little teeny fibers are melt blown
in an arrangement that looks a lot like
pick up sticks
this arrangement creates a 3d network
that has a porosity of 90% this leads to
very high air permeability but because
these fibers are so far apart you may
think there'll be no filtration benefit
you may think harmful particles can just
float through the fibers like water
through a sieve not so these fibers get
charged into quasi permanent dipoles
called electrodes so they get an
electrostatic charge basically once this
layer is charged it traps harmful
particles these fibers are
electrostatically charged as they are
created this charge that they have
allows the mask to filter much better
without adding any density without
making it more difficult to breathe
through if this is weakened or lost the
mask efficiency plummet so while the
makers of n95 s do not recommend reuse
or sterilization of their respirator
masks we are critically short all of
these masks worldwide we've got a
compromise which is a whole different
issue we are really just trying to do
the best we can do with what we have
which is kind of sad but true the CDC
has issued some guidance regarding a few
methods of decontamination the six most
studied decontamination methods are as
follows in no particular order one heat
to steam 375 percent alcohol or ethanol
for household diluted chlorine bleach
the
five ultraviolet or UV see light and six
vaporized hydrogen peroxide gas some
methods like vaporized hydrogen peroxide
can only be done in hospitals or other
large institutions that have access to
the materials and the required equipment
please guys don't try to make vaporized
hydrogen peroxide at home it's actually
really dangerous and it can become
explosive UVC light has its own hazards
it's currently difficult to get a UVC
machine and even if you get your hands
on one the disinfection parameters are
very specific other methods are just not
good for you they're toxic
they're flat-out toxic things like a
diluted bleach solution they're not a
good idea while the solution will
disinfect your Mac it will also leave a
residual toxic gas that you'll be
breathing in all day so that leaves
alcohol steam and dry heat after
reviewing multiple studies we feel that
dry heat or heat with a very specific
humidity is the best way to go using dry
heat will make the mask last longer
however heat with the specific humidity
is better at deactivating Tsarskoe b2
scientists looked at alcohol
disinfection so while treating with 70%
ethanol has been shown to be a hundred
percent effective in in activating the
virus the n95 mask integrity is impaired
the mattress doesn't filter as
efficiently and it never fits the same
again it doesn't provide an adequate
seal there's a protocol called the
italian protocol where the mask is
sprayed with 70% ethanol the front of
the mask has sprayed ten times the mask
is then flipped and sprayed an
additional five times on the interior
this protocol did prove effective
currently though 70% ethanol is very
hard to find and thus the protocol is
not practical for the average person so
back to the protocol we suggest it's
been studied for multiple cycles and
demonstrated that it works well with
little to no degradation of mask quality
it can be used to sanitize your mask
upwards of 10 to 20 times so here's all
the stuff you're gonna need first
Ziploc container you want a 1.25 quart
size container second a convection oven
with no direct line-of-sight to any
radiative heat sources which would cause
potential damage to the mask third a
paper towel fourth water and fifth an
eyedropper so here's what you're gonna
do first
you're gonna pre-heat your oven to 85
degrees Celsius which is 185 degrees
Fahrenheit then you're gonna place your
mask inside the container face down
you're gonna cut a 2.5 by 2.5 inch
square of paper towel and place it in
the container alongside the mask you're
gonna drop 500 microliters which is a
half a milliliter or ten drops of water
onto the paper towel this will provide
the mask with the exact amount of
humidity needed which is about 60% then
you're gonna place the lid on the
container nice and tight place the
container inside the preheated
convection oven again that's at 85
degrees Celsius or 185 degrees
Fahrenheit next you're gonna let it
disinfect or cook for 30 minutes because
it actually takes time though to get the
mask up to temperature the total time in
the oven will need to be at least 40 to
50 minutes then you're gonna take it out
you're gonna open the lid and you're
gonna rotate the lid 45 degrees what
this does is it allowed air to naturally
flow around the mask and dry it out you
only need to do that for 5 minutes after
that you are done your mask is safe for
reuse so there you have it what we feel
is the safest and most effective way to
disinfect your n95 or homemade quality
filter mask let us know in the comments
below what you think of this video also
let us know if there's any topics you
really would like to hear more about
until next time everyone stay healthy
stay well and Aloha